---
layout: post
title: "Grey does not exist"
date: 2026-06-18 12:00:00 +0530
category: thoughts
---
# The Grey Area in Reviews

Don't worry, the colour grey exists.

We certainly see it in the colour grading of movies that look like a grey *Dragon Ball* wasteland.

What I mean is that our ability to understand that a movie, a series, or a story can simply be... **fine**, seems to have disappeared.

A piece of media is either the greatest thing ever created, a masterpiece that deserves to be cherished for generations to come, or it is such garbage that it belongs in the deepest depths of hell, where Dante should probably add an entirely new circle just to accommodate it.

And I speak no hyperbole.

I don't feel sad for the state of journalism or ideas. What I do feel sad for is my second-favourite detective of all time, Monsieur Hercule Poirot, who would be terribly disappointed by the ways in which we are not using our little grey cells.

So let us try to understand where this problem lies, and whether there is any solution to it.

---

## The Problem with Thinking in Extremes

Now, before we go any further, I want to clarify something.

This is going to be primarily about movies.

But you can see this kind of thinking practically everywhere.

You are either a staunch supporter of vegetarian food, or an ardent believer that meat is the only source of protein.

You are either completely against the government and deserve to be thrown into the towns of Lyari, or you are so subservient that you cannot see a single flaw in anything the government does.

You are either a misogynist who does not understand women, or you are such a staunch feminist that apparently killing a person is suddenly justified for the greater good.

But I digress.

Let us stick to movies.

Because as Ramadhir Singh rightfully said:

> "Hindustan mein jab tak cinema hai, log ch*ye bante rahenge."

So let us look at some examples of how we, as an audience, need to calm our heads and think for a second.

Yes, I know brain rot and AI have made the word *thinking* obsolete.

But I implore you.

**Just think.**

---

## You Can Like Something and Still Criticise It

For example, I think we can reasonably admit that the first *Dhurandhar* is probably as close as we are going to get to seeing the kind of Mossad operations that take place in India.

We can also reasonably agree that the film is a masterclass in creating tension and building suspense over the course of three hours.

At the same time, we can reasonably admit that the lines given to R. Madhavan's character, Ajay Sanyal, about how a future government might make things better, feel less like dialogue and more like a commentary being delivered directly to the audience.

And somehow, all of these things can be true at the same time.

You can admire what a film is doing while criticising what it is trying to say.

You can do the same thing with *Animal*.

You can enjoy the carnage, the sound design, the score, the performances, and the sheer audacity of the film.

And you can also criticise how the film has written its female characters, with roughly the same importance that Christopher Nolan gives to his female leads.

And let me tell you a shocker.

**You are allowed to have these opinions while also liking a movie.**

You are allowed to say:

> "I enjoyed this movie, but I think this part was badly written."

You are allowed to say:

> "I hate what this movie is trying to say, but I think it is extremely well made."

You are even allowed to say:

> "This movie is objectively not very good, but I had a fantastic time watching it."

Like *Main Tera Hero*.

Look, I secretly believe it is the greatest film ever made, but I cannot say this in public because then my pretentious film snob license might get revoked.

That last one is particularly important.

Because you can like a bad movie.

You can dislike a good movie.

You can love half of a movie and hate the other half.

What makes you a moron is not disliking a movie.

What makes you a moron is deciding that an entire film is worthless because you disliked two dialogues.

Or deciding that a movie is perfect because you liked the actor.

Or deciding that a film is automatically bad because it contains an opinion you disagree with.

Because, well, news flash buddy, every film is a product of somebody's perspective.

Every filmmaker has opinions.

Every film contains assumptions about the world.

You can view *Haider* as left-wing propaganda sympathising with extremism.

You can view *Wake Up Sid* as youth propaganda, peddling the idea that young people are inherently better than old people.

You can do that.

But you can also view these films as well-made, auteur-driven movies.

And that is the point.

> **The presence of an idea does not automatically make a film bad.**
>
> **And the absence of an idea does not automatically make a film good.**

---

## Nostalgia Is Not a Review

But we don't really like second impressions.

For us, the first impression is all that matters.

We do not care if *The Dark Knight Rises* is a badly made film that misunderstands and eventually forgets about Batman.

Because we have fond memories of watching *The Dark Knight* on television and being completely enamoured by it.

So we become incapable of handling any criticism directed at Christopher Nolan.

And the same thing happens in the opposite direction.

Because we have fond memories of watching the first *Housefull*, *Dhamaal*, or *Golmaal*, we keep giving their sequels chances.

We keep telling ourselves:

> "Maybe this one will be good."

> "The first one was so nice, surely they can do it again."

And then we watch the movie.

And it is terrible.

Then we watch the next one.

And it is also terrible.

And then we watch the next one.

At this point, I don't even know whether we are fans or prisoners.

The same thing happens with *Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah*.

We know the quality has declined to a level that would rival the quality of Indian journalism.

We complain about it.

We mock it.

We talk about how it is not what it used to be.

And then we watch a recent episode anyway.

Because maybe.

Just maybe.

A good episode might pop up.

And the worst part is that when it doesn't, we will still come back tomorrow.

**Why?**

Because our relationship with media is not always rational.

Sometimes we are not consuming the thing itself.

We are consuming the possibility of feeling the way we felt when we first watched it.

And that is where nostalgia becomes dangerous.

Because sometimes when somebody criticises a movie we love, they are not just criticising a movie.

They are criticising a memory.

And how dare they?

---

## Enjoyment Is Not the Same as Quality

So why is it that we do not like certain content, are extremely vocal about how much we dislike it, and yet cannot help but watch it?

Why can we not simply accept that something has both good and bad qualities?

Well, maybe part of the answer is that movies are, for most people, a low-energy activity.

We do not always watch movies for the plot.

We watch them for the vibes.

We watch them to relax.

We watch them because we like an actor.

We watch them because the music is good.

We watch them because we are bored.

And there is absolutely nothing wrong with that.

You can watch a terrible movie and have a great time.

You can watch a technically brilliant movie and be bored out of your mind.

But somewhere along the way, we started confusing our enjoyment of a movie with the quality of a movie.

> "I enjoyed this film" became "this is a good film."
>
> "I disliked this film" became "this is a bad film."

And these are not the same things.

A movie can be incredibly well-made and still not be for you.

A movie can be badly written and still be immensely entertaining.

A movie can make you uncomfortable and still be worth watching.

A movie can contain ideas you disagree with and still have value.

---

## The Internet Rewards Extremes

But the internet does not really reward this kind of thinking.

Because a normal opinion is not very interesting online.

Nobody wants to see you say:

> "I thought the movie was okay."

Nobody is going to make a thumbnail out of that.

Nobody is going to quote you on Twitter.

Nobody is going to make a thirty-minute response video called:

> "Why This Person Is Completely Wrong About This Movie."

But say:

> "This is the worst movie ever made."

Or:

> "If you dislike this film, you don't understand cinema."

And suddenly, you have an opinion.

The internet has gradually taught us that an opinion is not valuable because it is thoughtful.

It is valuable because it is extreme enough to be noticed.

So now, when a movie is released, we do not simply watch it.

We pick a side.

You must either love the director or hate him.

You must either call the film a masterpiece or demand that the director be arrested.

You must either defend every single decision made by a movie you like, or pretend that the entire film is worthless because of one bad scene.

And when you combine this insatiable greed to be relevant with the thinking capacity of a panda, you get a creature that can only see black and white.

And no, I am not talking about the panda here.

Because there is a reason why a colour picker makes it so easy to select black and white.

It takes a little more thought to create grey.

So love your pandas, but give some love to the grey koalas as well.

---

## So What Can We Do?

So with all that said, what can you do?

Well, simply put, when watching a movie, dedicate your efforts to the film as well.

Not just your time.

Because, as my idol Batuk Patel would rightfully say in this situation:

> "Aadmi ko kaam mein dimaag dena chahiye. Time toh magazine bhi hai."

So, no matter how strong the urge is, do not immediately open YouTube the moment you finish watching a film and search for somebody else to tell you what you thought about it.

Sit with it.

Think about what worked.

Think about what didn't.

Think about what you enjoyed despite its flaws.

Think about what you disliked despite its strengths.

Read the credits.

Look at the people who made it.

Understand the effort that went into creating it.

And maybe, just maybe, you will find the grey cell.

Because a movie does not have to be perfect for you to like it.

And it does not have to be terrible for you to criticise it.

You can enjoy the good.

You can criticise the bad.

And you can do both at the same time.

Maybe grey does exist after all.

And perhaps Monsieur Poirot would be proud to know that we finally decided to use our little grey cells.
